DETAILED SYLLABUS:
UNIT-1: Course Introduction - Need, Basic Guidelines, Content and Process for Value Education
*1. Purpose and motivation for the course, recapitulation from Universal Human Values-I 2. Self-Exploration–what is it? - Its content and process; ‘Natural Acceptance’ and Experiential Validation- as the process for self-exploration 3. Continuous Happiness and Prosperity- A look at basic Human Aspirations 4. Right understanding, Relationship and Physical Facility- the basic requirements for fulfilment of aspirations of every human being with their correct priority 5. Understanding Happiness and Prosperity correctly- A critical appraisal of the current scenario 6. Method to fulfil the above human aspirations: understanding and living in harmony at various levels.
UNIT-II: Understanding Harmony in the Human Being - Harmony in Myself!
*7. Understanding human being as a co-existence of the sentient ‘I’ and the material ‘Body’ 8. Understanding the needs of Self (‘I’) and ‘Body’ - happiness and physical facility 9. Understanding the Body as an instrument of ‘I’ (I being the doer, seer and enjoyer) 10. Understanding the characteristics and activities of ‘I’ and harmony in ‘I’ 11. Understanding the harmony of I with the Body: Sanyam and Health; correct appraisal of Physical needs, meaning of Prosperity in detail 12. Programs to ensure Sanyam and Health.
UNIT-III: Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in Human Relationship
*13. Understanding values in human-human relationship; meaning of Justice (nine universal values in relationships) and program for its fulfilment to ensure mutual happiness; Trust and Respect as the foundational values of relationship 14. Understanding the meaning of Trust; Difference between intention and competence- up to this only. 2 Full Units and Half of the 3rd Unit is the syllabus for MID-1
























Some more Probable Questions for Mid-1

UNIT-I
1.	a)	What is value education? Why there is a need for value education	[7M]
	b)	Define self exploration. What is the content of self-exploration?	[7M]
(OR)
2.	a)	What are the basic aspirations of human being? Define and explain	[7M]
	b)	Explain the basic requirement for the fulfilment of human aspirations.	[7M]
UNIT-II
3.	a)	Distinguish between the activities going on in the self, going on in the body, and involving both the self and the body.	[7M]
	b)	What are the problems that we are facing today because of operating on the basis of pre-conditioned desires and sensation?
	[7M]
(OR)
4.	a)	How does the feeling of sanyam ensure health of the body? List two programs of sanyam?	[7M]
	b)	Explain the relation between the self and the body. What is the responsibility of the self towards the body?	[7M]
UNIT-III
5.	a)	What do you understand by trust? Differentiate between intention and competence with examples.	[7M]
	b)	How can the comprehensive human goals of right understanding, prosperity, fearlessness and existence create harmony in society?
	[7M]
(OR)